out with a diagram that the support material for
the course would be made up of several different
disciplines and if they had two out of the six that
was usually adequate and that they shouldn't be
shouldn't have difficulty catching up on the
others but that if they had more than two out of the
six they would probably find it much easier.
Describe the course and its makeup. You taught it
how many times per year? This course is taught
every fall semester. And about how many normally
in their first years? How many students? The
student numbers, usually 10 or 12. It was usually
larger than some of our other graduate courses.
But it changed through the years because each of
these areas are influenced by economic factors
and when the geologists were getting more jobs,
well the students went out in the field and that
type of factor entered in. It's a course that
combines crystallography and mineralogy and
chemistry and physics looking at the at the solid
materials of soils. And that means everything
from glass out of a volcano to the oldest, rustiest
soils you can think of in the most highly weathered
landscapes in the world. Compare the course
content then, 30 years ago, and now. How has it
changed? It's changed mostly in exactness. We
used to make generalizations where the data were
inadequate. We would say in early textbooks you
would find people writing about amorphous iron
oxides Well, amorphous iron oxides were really
not amorphous, most always, but we didn't have
electron microscopes that were good enough to
identify those very tiny crystals with very small
spacings. And so today, that word amorphous has
gotten smaller and smaller through the through
the decades. And in general, we've gotten much
more exact. We can deal with bonding somewhat,
chemical bonding with infrared more than we used
to. And the data set has expanded so much. Some of
the basics, of course, Roentgen invented,
discovered x-rays about 100 years ago. And that
put clay mineralogy in, which is much of soil
mineralogy. And so we've had x-ray machines. I use
an x-ray machine that's 30 years old. So in a sense,
but with the computers and with the visuals, Many
of them now, of course, we do in color and do
electronically and all that. Those are
technological advances. Did this course, when
you started it here, did it meet once a week, three
times a week, seminar, lecture, or what? Through
the years, it's a heavy laboratory course because
we teach several different instrumental
methods, chemical methods, and physical
methods. So the students work very hard in the lab.
And usually we, starting in the early days, we had
three lectures a week and we had two laboratory
sessions. Later in the term, we might narrow it
down to one laboratory session. But they spent a
lot of extra hours in the laboratory just because
we couldn't figure out any way to do the job more
efficiently. A couple of years ago, or more than
that, some years ago, five years or so ago, I
decided we're now on the west campus. Many of these
students come back and forth to the building. And I
thought it would be better if we get those students
in and teach them all in two afternoons a week. And
that's the way we do it now. We teach them a lecture,
have a long lecture, then we have a break, and then
we have a laboratory from two to five. And that is
better for the students and for the faculty. So I
like that. Of course, we don't just use
instruments in our laboratories. We also use
instruments in the electron mic laboratory.
Compare the facilities in the old state chemist
building. Did you all go straight over west of the
track? Compare that and that. Well, it's a lot of
overlap. The centrifuges that we bought years
before I came even, we're still using some of
those. And the x-ray machine that Kunze bought,
I'm still using it. But we computerized that, oh,
15 years ago or something. And now, instead of
having... strip charts and such. We have, all of
our data comes out on a disk and we move it around
electronically and plot it as we want to
electronically. In other words, we get a lot more
out of the instrument because the computer can run
the instrument for us and help us to get the data in a
manageable form. And that's been a tremendous
asset. We saved $100,000 on the instrument simply
by buying a computer and some data. processing
equipment that's made in a research laboratory in
california by a small firm out there and and and now
when we were working for example with the rice land
poorly crystalline materials we just set the
computer up to run that instrument for 10 hours if
that's what it needed and and this is random
particle statistics that we use in case of x-rays,
and therefore if we can integrate over 10 hours
data sort of step by step, then our statistics are
much better and we can get definitive data on
things that we had never even found before. Does
each student have the same research task plus a
special project? Like in history, they'd do a term
paper and it'd be a different term paper for each
youngster. What would be their laboratory
research project? In our case, each student is
encouraged and they very, very consistently
follow through, bring a sample from their thesis
or dissertation research and we take it apart. If
it's a rock, they grind it up and we pursue it if it's
a soil clay that's wet or dry well we we deal with
that or any soil uh of course most all of our
procedures are directed toward soils because
that's that's the main thrust of the course And so
they, this is a wonderful course, I think, and I
think the students do too, in spite of the fact they
work so long, they never really complain about the
lab.
We take the soil apart, physically and
chemically. and then we analyze these
components. And then we put those data back
together again, and they interpret those data in
terms of if it's from two miles deep in an oil well,
or if it's from the surface soil in a rice paddy, or
it's from anywhere, any type of sample. And if it's
a treated material they're making for roadbed,
that sort of thing. So the students work on their
own material, and I've served on many committees
in geology and civil engineering, and the only
mineralogy data that many of those students had in
their thesis was what they got in our class. Now,
what we do now, and we've done in the last months,
like from oceanography, they have a lot of fine
equipment, but they don't have what we have. So
they send their student over, Bill Bryant, for
example, And we had this young lady from Italy who
is a student of his. She spent like two or three
months taking the soils, the sediments from the
Gulf apart and then X-raying them and so on and
making the analyses. And then that basis, she was
writing her dissertation. So that's one of the
beauties of it. It's an interactive course that
goes on for quite some time, often. But back to this
comparing, in terms of the laboratory equipment
and space per student in the old and new buildings.
How did those compare? We have a very adequate
laboratory space. Now we have shrunk through the
years. There was a time when we kept these students
in the course separate from our own research
laboratories. We can't afford that luxury
anymore. So we now teach them in our research
laboratories and we teach them also to respect
what's going on otherwise in the laboratory. And
this has worked out very well. We fabricate a
significant amount of our equipment and modify
quite a lot of our equipment so we don't have showy
laboratories. but they're very functional. We
use a magnet to separate the iron minerals from the
other minerals. This was a cast off from chemistry
that I traded an old spectrometer for that I
couldn't use anymore. And yet this magnet has
served us very well. That's the kind of things we
sometimes do. Now, when you got here, did you feel
that the students you had here, that their
capability was as good as what you had known at the
other two schools, or better, or what?
I think the first student I had had a little problem
in that we were sort of emerging from one type of
research to more modern research. And he
struggled quite a bit. And of course, he was
changing from one advisor to another. That didn't
make it any easier. But he ended up finishing here,
doing a post-doctoral in Louisiana, and then
going back and being a leader in India. And I even
visited him there. So he... Against odds, he was
not the most brilliant and effective student we
ever had. But he had a lot of thrust, and it all
turned out very well. But in general, those
students that were in your course? We had good
students. We've had good students throughout.
This is a complex mix, as I've said. Not only of
professions, but ethnically it's complex. I
presume you had fewer international students 30
years ago. Definitely so, yeah. Were most of the
American? No, and there weren't any girls in those
first days either. But now my course is probably a
third girls, young ladies. Do you remember any
events that had anything to do with the first girls
in the courses? Were there any awkward moments or
amusing moments? How did the other students
relate to the young ladies? I think at times we
rather soft-pedaled around the young ladies
because we weren't quite sure how that was going to
work out. But there's so many surprises in
students. We had a case a few years ago when we had a
little Chinese girl, didn't say very much, and
very attentive. And then later when she was
writing, we realized that she was a perfectionist
in English. And she had actually grown up in New
York. And then we would talk to her freely and it was
a revelation, you know. She was really a very
exceptional student. And then we've had some
others who just got here and they really struggled
because the English wasn't... One thing that I
learned, the English taught in Taiwan is
unfortunately not very good. The only student
that I had from Taiwan who had excellent English
served in their military, as an officer in the
military, and he had had a lot of exposure of
English, and that was Tsai Chin, who got his
master's here, his doctor's here, both under my
advice, and now he is an executive in the
environmental branch of the industry in Taiwan.
He started with humble beginnings with no
support, but he eventually, and he's been back
here to visit us from time to time. In general, I'm
not going to ask the negative, in general, the best
international students come from what country
and or areas of the world? The best that you've had.
Pretty hard question to answer in view of the
diversity of them. The student I have right now
from China, mainland China, is one of the best I've
ever had. And partly because he developed his
English very well, and he had his sights. I have
corresponded with him for seven years, and he's
been here four years. So he prepared himself for
this. And the Taiwanese student who did well, he
came from zero. It's very slow to emerge, but in the
end was quite good. So,
you know, we don't have a very good sampling of
students from Germany and Britain. And so it's, I
would say, the Chinese students would be one of the
better groups. Now, in the department as a whole,
we've had people from more other disciplines and
different other countries, Scandinavia and so
on. But
it's a complex subject and And I try to examine
students in such a way that I cut across what they
learn. And therefore, by the end of the term, I have
a whole page of data on what their performance is.
And they don't spread out as much as it would be in
some other grading systems. And therefore, Well,
I've had some excellent students from the USA that
certainly did better than others, but they had
more going for them, I think. What has been your
philosophy about grading? Did you grade on a
curve, or? I grade on a curve, and I grade, and
students have taught me something about grading,
too. I didn't used to give much of the grade for lab,
because it's so hard to grade laboratory. But one
of the students, pointed that out to me once, so I
then changed it. I developed a more formal,
structured grading system and a lab manual, put it
in there along with all the other course
materials.
I grade on the curve. I grade a small percentage for
daily work. mainly just to stimulate their
activity. usually have three major exams and then
two grades in the laboratory at least. One would be
their final report. They submit reports on
certain of the instruments and the work they did
with them, but their final report is really kind of
a mini research paper on their sample and what they
learned about it and what they learned from the
scientific literature about it. and how that
applies. You said you had 10, 12 normally in the
course. Does grading on the curve imply only a
certain number are going to get an A and a certain
number are going to flunk? No. It's such a diverse
population.
I normally gave As and Bs and maybe one C
occasionally. That's pretty much the grade. And
if I had graded them just on the written exams, for
example, well, I would have probably had a wider
distribution. But when you put together the
recitation on an exam along with a laboratory
report. Some people do a much, the engineers write
great reports because they're trained to do that.
And so those things tend to balance out so the
students get closer together as the course gets on
further. And let's face it, that's a basic course
for their thesis research and I was really mostly
concerned that they'd be able to do the work
properly. If I thought that they could not
interpret an X-ray diffraction pattern and tell
what the crystal phases were that were there, then
they wouldn't get a B in the course, or an A,
certainly. In fact, do you work the students
harder now than you did 30 years ago? Does the
course require more effort? We try not to do that
because it is a heavy course.
I think what we do is we give them more service and
they go further. That's the way I see it. And I have a
research associate who works with me in the
course. And with the advent of the computer and all
the efficiencies that that brings, We go much
further with more methods, and they're better
trained than they used to be. Now, in recent years,
these two days where the course meets and the
inaudibles are, what day? Tuesday, Thursday.
Tuesday and Thursday. And it's from what hour to
what hour? The lecture is 12. Let's see, 1245 to,
when I'm doing it, I get used to it, but it's odd.
It's a 75-minute lecture, overlaps part of the
noon hour, and then we have a 15-minute break, as I
remember, and then I believe it's at 2 o'clock when
we start the lab. And it goes till? Till 5, 10,
according to the clock. In a normal day, what time
would you leave after lab, though? Or you're here
till about what? Well, I would be here till five,
and usually a little later, but my lab is mostly
taught by my research associate, and he would
definitely be here. And in what setting do you do
the lecture? Is it in a seminar room around a table,
or? I like the open forum room. Actually, the room I
use is a room that my colleague Tom Hallmark uses to
teach soil morphology. I chose it because we have
these tables, and the students can sit close. I use
a lot of models and a lot of visuals, so the surface
is all bare, and I don't have a lectern sitting in
front of me. I use an overhead projector some. And
along the walls, they have soil profiles from
Texas and Hawaii and some other states and special
soil maps, the periodic table of the elements, and
some maps to show different soil regions, the
taxonomy of the soils, which This being a graduate
course, we use quite a bit of soil science, but we
don't have all soil science students. So
therefore, I have to have some visuals that they
can just pick up all by looking up on the ceiling
there.
And there are specimens lying around in there that
occasionally I use in addition to the ones that I
take in. There's
a little indoctrination there, I guess you could
say. The taxonomy of soils is kind of like the
taxonomy of plants. It's familiar to people who
use it, but not very familiar to the public. And
then soil taxonomy is based on analytical data to a
very significant extent. So to keep from
burdening the student with more taxonomy than
they want, I use that display of soils. Otherwise,
when I said you notice the color of the iron oxides
in this soil, they wouldn't have a visual image at
all. And these profiles are one meter high or so.
Now almost every student in there is there very
much by their choice because of their thesis or
dissertation. Did the course, the official title
is of the course? I think it's just called Soil
Mineralogy. Does it have a nickname? Do the
students, have they come up with anything?
Probably they have some that I haven't ever heard
about. It's called clay mineralogy or soil
mineralogy, depending on who you ask. And it's a
heavily instrumented course. I don't know if
they've ever coined an expression for it or not. Do
you remember any kinds of pranks or jokes? in the
lab or anything they've ever done for fun?
They're pretty busy. They probably have, but I
don't really recall any of them. What about
something going wrong? Oh, well, as they go in the
room the first day, we have a big centrifuge cover.
with much of the paint scoured off of it. And a note
under, this is an object lesson. You always check
the cover on the centrifuge before you turn it on,
because someone failed to do that once, and that
cost us a lot. And centrifuges are, you know,
they're kind of the workhorse of this lab, and
they're really not serious threats to anyone, but
they have tremendous power. And they're like
these automobile tires that have fallen apart. At
the speeds they run, they're dangerous if not used
correctly. And so we spend a little time on that,
and we've used centrifuges with just a few minor
cases like that. We occasionally have an
accident, but not very often. What other
cautionary advice do you give the class?
Chemicals. We deal with hydrogen peroxide, which
is much more concentrated than bleach for the
hair. And we deal with some solvents
occasionally. Through the years, we have put
aside most of the toxic things that we used to use.
We don't use benzene anymore. We used to use
benzene, think much about it. We used to use
alcohol and acetone quite a lot. We've largely put
those aside. Substituted
other things. Let's see.
Was there a significant early graduate student,
one that you particular, in your earliest years,
you now look back on with great pride?
Oh yes, yes. I would say, More than one. Well,
describe some of those. One of those students. I
had a professor from Colorado State University
who wanted to come down for, as I recall, one term.
He was still on the faculty there. He came and spent
his term, and he was not so special. But then he went
back home and he sent me a graduate student of his
named Doug Ming. M-I-N-G? Ming. M-I-N-G. It's not
oriental. It's probably a shortening of the
German, I imagine. And Doug had been a soils
consultant on summers and he had been an athlete in
Colorado State as well as a soils student. Gotten
his master's degree with his gentleman who had
been here briefly. And we had a, he was a kind of
student that you didn't have to give much
instruction to, we just kind of discussed things
on an even level. And from time to time out on the
atrium we would stop and talk in the morning about
what he might work on. He was taking a lot of
courses. And finally, we concluded that he ought
to work on zeolites. And the reasons that we had was
that nobody really knew anything about zeolites
in soils, because they don't occur in many soils.
And they are being sold to the ranchers and farmers
down in the valley. And we knew that there were some
in those soils from the geology information that
was available. Well, in the end, Doug, as he went
on, once he got motivated, well, he did several
things uh he did his literature review as we start
things and i was doing the second of our three books
and i said well doug would you like to do that as a as a
chapter in the book and you could get publication
of your of your review and so he liked that idea so i
asked colleague from New York who is a zeolite
professional in a geologist sense. to team with
him, and they wrote that. And as he got further
along, he began to say, well, nobody uses zeolites
much in soils. I don't know whether I'm going to be
able to get a job or not. And it was the kind of time
when jobs weren't so abundant. And then one day, he
got a call from this geologist, Mumpton, and said,
would you like to come and give a paper on your
dissertation? to an international meeting. He's
going to meet in one of the Eastern Bloc countries.
And Doug said, well, I'd like to do that, but I'm
writing my dissertation, and I don't have any
money to go over there. And so they just kept upping
the ante. And finally they said, all right, we'll
pay you away. You're the only person we've been
able to find who can address zeolites in soils with
the experience base that you have. He had gone down
in southwest Texas and studied them in the field,
and we had gone down there and sampled and so on. So
he'd gotten quite a bit of experience. So he went
and gave a paper, which was published, and along
with several others. And then he got a
postdoctoral, yes, with NASA. And then after a
while, well, he just stayed and stayed. And they
made a position for him. He's now a space
scientist. And they developed two systems to
support man for long journeys in space. And one of
them is called Zeoponics. And that grew out of Doug
Ming's dissertation. Of course, it's come a long
way, but that's what got him started. And I
remember distinctly him coming one night. I was
working in the Electron Night Center alone, and he
came in and said, Dr. Dixon, I'm thinking about
dropping out of school and going back and
consulting like I used to this summer. What do you
think about that?
I said, well, Doug, you see what I'm doing and when
I'm doing it, so that's all the way I feel about you.
If you give this your best, you'll get a job. We
don't know where it's going to be, but you'll get a
job. And so he never asked that question anymore.
And now he's He organizes sessions and national
scientific meetings, and he travels all over the
country speaking for NASA, promoting their
programs, and he has a research program there.
Done exceptionally well. So you're obviously
proud of him. Others you want to mention?